<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI: Subject Continued</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-2" id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">Subject Continued</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When the door was opened, Charlotte, in a voice rendered scarcely articulate, through cold and the extreme agitation of her mind, demanded whether <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton was at home; the servant hesitated: he knew that his lady was engaged at a game of picquet with her dear Corydon, nor could he think she would like to be disturbed by a person whose appearance spoke her of so little consequence as Charlotte; yet there was something in her countenance that rather interested him in her favor, and he said his lady was engaged; but if she had any particular message he would deliver it.</p>
			<p>“Take up this letter,” said Charlotte, “tell her the unhappy writer of it waits in the hall for an answer.”</p>
			<p>The tremulous accent, the tearful eye, must have moved any heart not composed of adamant. The man took the letter from the poor suppliant, and hastily ascended the staircase.</p>
			<p>“A letter, madam,” said he, presenting it to his lady; “an immediate answer is required.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton glanced her eye carelessly over the contents. “What stuff is this”; cried she, haughtily; “have not I told you a thousand times that I will not be plagued with beggars and petitions from people one knows nothing about? Go tell the woman I can’t do anything in it. I’m sorry, but one can’t relieve everybody.”</p>
			<p>The servant bowed, and heavily returned with this chilling message to Charlotte.</p>
			<p>“Surely,” said she, “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton has not read my letter. Go, my good friend, pray, go back to her; tell her it is Charlotte Temple who requests beneath her hospitable roof to find shelter from the inclemency of the season.”</p>
			<p>“Prithee, don’t plague me, man,” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton, impatiently, as the servant advanced something in behalf of the unhappy girl. “I tell you I don’t know her.”</p>
			<p>“Not know me!” cried Charlotte, rushing into the room (for she had followed the man upstairs), “not know me⁠—not remember the ruined Charlotte Temple, who, but for you, perhap might still have been innocent, still have been happy. Oh! La Rue, this is beyond everything I could have believed possible.”</p>
			<p>“Upon my honor, miss,” replied the unfeeling woman with the utmost effrontery, “this is a most unaccountable address: it is beyond my comprehension. John,” continued she, turning to the servant, “the young woman is certainly out of her senses; do pray take her away, she terrifies me to death.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, God!” cried Charlotte, clasping her hands in an agony, “this is too much; what will become of me? but I will not leave you; they shall not tear me from you; here on my knees I conjure you to save me from perishing in the street; if you really have forgotten me, O, for charity’s sweet sake, this night let me be sheltered from the winter’s piercing cold.”</p>
			<p>The kneeling figure of Charlotte, in her affecting situation, might have moved the heart of a stoic to compassion; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton remained inflexible. In vain did Charlotte recount the time they had known each other at Chichester; in vain mention their being in the same ship; in vain were the names of Montraville and Belcour mentioned. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton could only say she was sorry for her imprudence, but could not think of having her own reputation endangered by encouraging a woman of that kind in her own house; besides, she did not know what trouble and expense she might bring upon her husband by giving shelter to a woman in her situation.</p>
			<p>“I can at least die here,” said Charlotte. “I feel I can not long survive this dreadful conflict. Father of mercy, here let me finish my existence.” Her agonizing sensations overpowered her, and she fell senseless on the floor.</p>
			<p>“Take her away,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crayton; “she will really frighten me into hysterics; take her away, I say, this instant.”</p>
			<p>“And where must I take the poor creature?” said the servant, with a voice and look of compassion.</p>
			<p>“Anywhere,” cried she hastily, “only don’t let me ever see her again. I declare she has flurried me so, I shan’t be myself again this fortnight.”</p>
			<p>John, assisted by his fellow servant, raised and carried her downstairs. “Poor soul,” said he, “you shall not lay in the street this night. I have a bed and a poor little hovel, where my wife and her little ones rest them; but they shall watch tonight and you shall be sheltered from danger.” They placed her in a chair; and the benevolent man, assisted by one of his comrades, carried her to the place where his wife and children lived. A surgeon was sent for; he bled her; she gave signs of returning life, and before the dawn gave birth to a female infant. After this event, she lay for some hours in a kind of stupor; and, if at any time she spoke, it was with a quickness and incoherence that plainly evinced the total deprivation of her reason.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
