<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter XXIII</h2>
			<h3>A Man May Smile, and Smile, and Be a Villain</h3>
			<p>WHILE Charlotte was enjoying some small degree of comfort in the consoling friendship of Mrs. Beauchamp, Montraville was advancing rapidly in his affection toward Miss Franklin.</p>
			<p>Julia was an amiable girl; she saw only the fair side of his character; she possessed an independent fortune, and resolved to be happy with the man of her heart, tho his rank and fortune were by no means so exalted as she had a right to expect; she saw the passion which Montraville struggled to conceal; she wondered at his timidity, but imagined the distance fortune had placed between them occasioned his backwardness, and made every advance which strict prudence and a becoming modesty would permit. Montraville saw with pleasure he [sic] was not indifferent to her [sic]; but a spark of honor which animated his bosom would not suffer him to take advantage of her partiality. He was well acquainted with Charlotte’s situation, and he thought there would be a double cruelty in forsaking her at such a time; and to marry Miss Franklin, while honor, humanity, every sacred law, obliged him still to protect and support Charlotte, was a baseness which his soul shuddered at.</p>
			<p>He communicated his uneasiness to Belcour: it was the very thing his pretended friend had wished. “And do you really,” said he, laughing, “hesitate at marrying the lovely Julia, and becoming master of her fortune, because a little, foolish, fond girl, chose to leave her friends, and run away with you to America? Dear Montraville, act more like a man of sense: this whining, pining Charlotte, who occasions you so much uneasiness, would have eloped with somebody else, if she had not with you.”</p>
			<p>“Would to Heaven,” said Montraville, “I had never seen her; my regard for her was but the momentary passion of desire; but I feel I shall love and revere Julia Franklin as long as I live; yet to leave poor Charlotte in her present situation, would be cruel beyond description.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my good, sentimental friend,” said Belcour, “do you imagine nobody has a right to provide for the brat but yourself?”</p>
			<p>Montraville started. “Sure,” said he, “you can not mean to insinuate that Charlotte is false!”</p>
			<p>“I don’t insinuate it,” said Belcour; “I know it.”</p>
			<p>Montraville turned pale as ashes. “Then there is no faith in woman,” said he.</p>
			<p>“While I thought you were attached to her,” said Belcour, with an air of indifference, “I never wished to make you uneasy by mentioning her perfidy; but, as I know you love and are beloved by Miss Franklin, I was determined not to let these foolish scruples of honor step between you and happiness, or your tenderness for the peace of a perfidious girl prevent your uniting yourself to a woman of honor.”</p>
			<p>“Good Heavens!” said Montraville, “what poignant reflections does a man endure who sees a lovely woman plunged in infamy, and is conscious he was her first seducer. But are you certain of what you say, Belcour?”</p>
			<p>“So far,” replied he, “that I myself have received advances from her, which I would not take advantage of out of regard to you. But, hang it, think no more about her. I dined at Franklin’s to-day, and Julia bid me seek and bring you to tea: so come along, my lad, make good use of opportunity, and seize the gifts of fortune while they are within your reach.”</p>
			<p>Montraville was too much agitated to pass a happy evening even in the company of Julia Franklin. He determined to visit Charlotte early the next morning, tax her with her falsehood, and take an everlasting leave of her; but when the morning came, he was commanded on duty, and for six weeks was prevented from putting his design into execution. At length he found an hour to spare, and walked out to spend it with Charlotte: it was near four o’clock in the afternoon when he arrived at her cottage; she was not in the parlor, and without calling her servant, he walked upstairs, thinking to find her in her bedroom. He opened the door, and the first object that met his eyes was Charlotte asleep on the bed, and Belcour by her side.</p>
			<p>“Death and distraction!” said he, stamping, “this is too much. Rise, villain, and defend yourself!” Belcour sprang from the bed. The noise awoke Charlotte; terrified at the furious appearance of Montraville, and seeing Belcour with him in the chamber, she caught hold of his arm, as he stood by the bedside, and eagerly asked what was the matter.</p>
			<p>“Treacherous, infamous girl!” said he, “can you ask? How came he here?” pointing to Belcour.</p>
			<p>“As Heaven is my witness!” replied she, weeping, “I do not know. I have not seen him for these three weeks.”</p>
			<p>“Then you confess he sometimes visits you?”</p>
			<p>“He came sometimes by your desire.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis false; I never desired him to come, and you know I did not; but mark me, Charlotte, from this instant our connection is at an end. Let Belcour or any other of your favored lovers take you and provide for you; I have done with you forever!”</p>
			<p>He was then going to leave her; but starting wildly from the bed, she threw herself on her knees before him, protested her innocence, and intreated him not to leave her. “Oh, Montraville!” said she, “kill me, for pity’s sake, kill me, but do not doubt my fidelity. Do not leave me in this horrid situation; for the sake of your unborn child, oh, spurn not the wretched mother from you!”</p>
			<p>“Charlotte,” said he, with a firm voice, “I shall take care that neither you nor your child want anything in the approaching painful hour; but we meet no more.” He then endeavored to raise her from the ground, but in vain. She clung about his knees, entreating him to believe her innocent, and conjuring Belcour to clear up the dreadful mystery.</p>
			<p>Belcour cast on Montraville a smile of contempt: it irritated him almost to madness; he broke from the feeble arms of the distressed girl; she shrieked and fell prostrate on the floor.</p>
			<p>Montraville instantly left the house, and returned hastily to the city.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
